---
layout: post
title:  "Adventures with the linux desktop"
date:   2015-02-02 22:36:27
author: "Brock Ellis"
categories: work
comments: true
image: "2015-02-02.jpg"
---

tl;dr Two months after using Ubuntu full time, here are my thoughts on the linux desktop

My History With Linux
-------------------
I have long used a Chromebook as my primary development laptop. At 
first, I used online code editors like Nitrious.io and Cloud9 to edit 
code. Thoes editors are great, but I never felt like I was in complete 
control of my code. Viewing a file browser, a command line and an IDE 
all in one browser tab just seemed like too much all at once.

Right around the time my daughter was born 2 years ago, I attempted to 
dual boot a proper linux distro on my Samsung Chromebook with crouton. 
Having a honest-to-goodness linux install was a breath of fresh air 
and it was an amazing few days. However, issues started to bubble up 
when I went to install software for work. Skype wouldn't work 
properly. Then my IDE of choice wouldn't install correctly. 

Come to find out that the Samsung Chromebook that I owned was based on 
an ARM processor instead of an Intel based processor, which limited 
the software that was able to run on it. With my tail between my legs, 
I uninstalled crouton and went back to cloud IDE land.  

Taking Action
---------------------
About 6 months ago, the itch came back. The itch to use a real distro 
and not some cloud emulation. I purchaed the HP14 Chromebook on 
woot.com which gave me 3 additional inches of screen space and a much 
needed Intel processor. Thirty minutes later, I was in heaven. 
Firefox, Skype, HipChat, Komodo, Spotify...all working perfectly. And 
a real terminal at my finger tips. 

Then I had to go to work. We recently started a new project at work 
called 'Innovation Hour'. The programmers at Sycamore Education take 
the afternoon on Friday's off and work on side projects. There is 
really no limit to what you're allowed to work on except that it 
**cannot** be something that you would work on during normal business 
hours. We are to use that time to innovate, learn or experiment. 
During that time I was attempting to learn a javascript framework 
called Ember, but was having a lot of trouble doing so on a Windows 
machine with no first-class command line interface. Two days before 
Christmas, I took my life into my own hands and reparitioned my hard 
drive so that I could install Ubuntu.

Caveat emptor
-------------------------
While attempting to repartition my hard drive, I screwed something up. 
I changed the type of partition where I wasn't supposed to and ended 
up nuking my entire drive. (Turns out I had 2 hard drives in a RAID 
set up, which I wasn't aware of.) I was upset for all of 5 minutes 
until I realized that all my code was on Github, all my documents were 
on Google Drive and all my photos were on an external hard drive. The 
biggest thing I lost was my collection of clipart and fun memes that I 
had collected over the last 4 years. 

After installing Ubuntu 14 LTS, I booted it up for the first time. It 
was magical. It was running on a beefy desktop machine with a decent 
graphic card, so my dual monitor setup was not disturbed. I quickly 
set out to install all of my most used apps. I connected to our 
network with any issues. I found our local network printer and 
installed the drivers without any problems. In fact, things were going 
so well that I was sure something would go wrong soon.

Final Thoughts
---------------------------
I'm still waiting for something to go wrong. My only issue thus far 
was some insane lag and memory issues with the Firefox Developer 
Edition which, to its credit, was very new when I was using it. 

I generally have HipChat, the Spotify Linux Preview, Firefox a half 
dozen tabs, 3 or 4 terminals and Skype open all at once with 0 
performance issues. With those day-to-day programs, along with Google 
Docs/Sheets, my entire work stack accounted for.

Now, I don't think that a Linux desktop is for everyone, but I will be 
advocating for all of the developers at our company to switch to some 
flavor of Linux for their next computer purchase. All in all, its been 
a *great* experience.
